Epigenetics is the study of heritable changes in gene expression or cellular pheno-
type caused by mechanisms other than changing the underlying DNA sequence. Two
epigenetic phenomena, genomic imprinting and AEI, are discussed in this dissertation.
Genomic imprinting is an epigenetically regulated process by which imprinted genes
are expressed in a parent-of-origin-specic manner, and AEI refers to asymmetric
expression of two dierent alleles at the same locus.
Many analysis tools had been used to investigate these two phenomena. Among
these tools, RNA-seq is a powerful new technology for mapping and quantifying tran-
scriptomes using ultra high throughput next generation sequencing technologies. Us-
ing RNA-seq, a genome-wide study can investigate genome-wide genomic imprinting
and AEI without prior knowledge of genes or coding regions. Compared to microarray
hybridization-based methods, RNA-seq does not have background noise due to hy-
bridization. Data from RNA-seq experiments are digital, so they do not have limited
range of signals. Compared to the traditional sequence-based methods, RNA-seq is
more economical which makes genome-wide mapping feasible. Nevertheless, RNA-seq
has its own limitations, such as errors in base calling, reading mapping uncertainty
in genome, and biases from transcript length and sequence base composition.
In this dissertation, we focus on how investigating sequencing parameters may
aect power of tests for detecting imprinting and/or AEI, and whether the current
ii
technology can provide sucient power for such an endeavor for mouse and human
data. Since existing methods in the literatures are not amenable for detecting such
eects and since these two eects may be confounded with one another, we also pro-
pose a joint test for simultaneous detection of imprinting and AEI. For mouse data,
the reciprocal cross design for mouse, and two denitions of informative reads based
on binomial distribution are used throughout this dissertation. The proposed joint
test and the two-chi-squares test in the literature are used for power calculation and
simulation study, and their results are compared and contrasted. The results show
that the joint test is not only applicable for simultaneous detection of the two epi-
genetic eects, but it is also more powerful compared to the two-chi-squares test.
Furthermore, we note that the formula for power calculation in terms of sequencing
parameters (sequencing depth and read length) and sequencing divergence is appli-
cable for other tests, not just for the joint test.
We provide theoretical power under some combinations of parameters. If an in-
formative read is dened as covering at least one SNP for mouse reciprocal cross
design, sequencing depth E(T) = 40 is necessary to achieve sucient power under
read length l = 100 and sequence divergence d = 1%, especially when imprinting and
AEI eects (p1; p2) are moderate. Fixing E(T) = 30 and d = 1%, the power does
not improve much when l > 100. It suggests that increasing sequence depth, not
read length, is the key to improve power, although it can be expensive. On the other
hand, if an informative read is dened as covering a particular SNP, then E(T) at
least 130 and l at least 250 is necessary to achieve sucient power under d = 2%,
even when imprinting and AEI eects are strong. Because increasing read length
may have a higher error rate of base calling with currently available technology, we
iii
suggest increasing sequence depth as more reliable, albeit more expensive, alterna-
tive. Note that the two denitions of \an informative read" may be interpreted as a
genome-wide or a candidate gene based study, respectively.
As for human data, we discuss which trio structures are informative, and we still
use the joint test to detect imprinting and AEI. In the theoretical power calculation,
except for the eects of sequencing parameters and sequence divergence, the number
of families in a random sample of N trios is also considered. If an informative read
is dened as covering at least one SNP, sequencing depth E(T) = 8 is necessary to
achieve reasonable power under the setting of N = 50, l = 100 and d = 1%, especially
when imprinting and AEI eects are moderate. Fixing E(T) = 4 and d = 1%, the
power does not improve much when l > 100. As for the number of families N, under
E(T) = 4, d = 1% and l = 100, even N = 20 leads to a sucient power for detecting
strong imprinting and AEI eects (such as one of the p0
is is 0.1). However, a larger
size such as N = 100 is necessary for more moderate eects. If an informative read
is dened as covering a particular SNP, E(T) of at least 10 and l of at least 250
is necessary to achieve sucient power under N = 100 and d = 2%, even when
imprinting and/or AEI eects are strong. As for the eect of N, under E(T) = 10,
d = 2% and l = 250, N = 200 is necessary to achieve sucient power even for strong
imprinting and AEI eects.
